Registration Request for a New Service Parameter Key (SvcParamKey): "Opportunistic Operator-led Transport Signal" (`oots`)

Submitted for inclusion in the IANA "Service Parameter Keys (SvcParamKeys)" registry, per the procedure
defined in Section 14.3 of RFC 9460.

Number: (to be assigned by IANA)

Name: oots

Meaning: Indicates, per DNS transport protocol available at this nameserver, the operator's assessment of
the share of the nameserver's total query load that it is confident it can serve over that transport,
expressed as a percentage. The weights are independent per-transport capability estimates, not a distribution
of queries across transports; they need not (and typically do not) sum to 100.

Reference: This document (see below).

--------

1. Wire Format

The wire-format value for the "oots" SvcParamKey consists of one or more DNS transport protocol
entries concatenated without separators between entries. Each entry is encoded as:

* a 1-octet unsigned integer length L (1 ≤ L ≤ 255), giving the length in octets of the protocol
  identifier string that follows, then
* the protocol identifier string itself (L octets of ASCII), then
* a 1-octet unsigned integer weight value in the range 0–100 inclusive.

The total length of each entry is thus L + 2 octets. The SvcParamValue contains at least one entry (N ≥ 1).

Protocol identifier strings are defined as follows:

| Protocol | Identifier string | Description |
|-----|------|---------|
| do53 | "do53" | DNS over UDP/TCP (traditional, port 53) |
| dot  | "dot"  | DNS over TLS (RFC 7858) |
| doh  | "doh"  | DNS over HTTPS (RFC 8484) |
| doq  | "doq"  | DNS over QUIC (RFC 9250) |

The identifier strings "dot" and "doq" are identical to the ALPN protocol identifiers registered for the
corresponding DNS transports (RFC 7858 and RFC 9250 respectively) and used in the "alpn" SvcParamKey
(RFC 9460). The identifiers "do53" and "doh" have no ALPN equivalent and are defined here for use in the
"oots" SvcParamKey only. "do53" denotes plaintext DNS service over UDP/TCP on port 53, for which no ALPN
is negotiated. "doh" denotes DNS over HTTPS (RFC 8484); DoH is carried over HTTP, which is identified by
the ALPN tokens "h2" or "h3" rather than by a "doh" ALPN token, so "doh" is defined here as a distinct
"oots" transport identifier.

Weight values are unsigned integers in the range [0, 100]. For a given transport, the weight is the operator's
estimate of the fraction of the nameserver's total query load that it is confident it can serve over that
transport, expressed as a percentage of that total. The weights are NOT a distribution that partitions queries
across transports and are NOT an instruction to a resolver on how to split its queries; each weight is an
independent capability assessment against the same total load. Consequently, a nameserver MAY advertise a weight
of 100 for more than one transport (full confidence on each), and the sum of the weights in a single "oots"
SvcParamValue will typically exceed 100. A weight of 0 indicates that the transport is not available at this
nameserver.

An "oots" weight is encoded on the wire as a single octet and is therefore syntactically capable of carrying
values from 0 to 255, but only the range 0-100 is meaningful. An encoder MUST NOT emit a weight greater than
100. A receiver that encounters a weight octet greater than 100 MUST interpret it as 100; it MUST NOT treat
the entry, or the enclosing SVCB RR, as malformed on this basis. As with unrecognized protocol identifiers,
this preserves the independence of the remaining entries and ensures that a malformed or hostile weight value
can only degrade transport selection, never break resolution.

For example, oots="do53:100,dot:10,doq:20" advertises that the operator is confident it can serve its full query
load over Do53, but only about 10% of that same load over DoT and about 20% over DoQ. These values are
opportunistic hints: a resolver MAY use them, for instance to send a minority of traffic over DoT or DoQ where
supported, but they do not prescribe a fixed split, and a resolver MAY ignore them entirely. Ignoring or failing
to receive an "oots" value simply degrades to normal transport selection and never prevents resolution.

When a protocol entry is absent from the SvcParamValue, the following default interpretations apply:

* For dot, doh, and doq: absence of an entry is equivalent to a weight of 0, indicating that the transport is
  not available at this nameserver.

* For do53: absence of an entry is equivalent to a weight of 100, reflecting the assumption that traditional
  DNS over UDP/TCP remains available unless explicitly indicated otherwise. An operator wishing to indicate
  that DNS service over UDP/TCP is not available MUST explicitly include a do53 entry with a weight of 0.

Each protocol identifier string MUST NOT appear more than once within a single SvcParamValue. An implementation
receiving an "oots" SvcParamValue containing a duplicate protocol identifier MUST treat the enclosing
SVCB RR as malformed and ignore it.

An implementation that does not recognize a protocol identifier string MUST ignore that entry and continue
processing the remaining entries.

2. Presentation Format

The presentation format for the "oots" SvcParamKey is:

oots="proto:weight[,proto:weight]*"

Where "proto" is one of the strings "do53", "dot", "doh", or "doq", and "weight" is a decimal integer in the
range 0–100 inclusive. Multiple entries are separated by commas with no surrounding whitespace. The order
of entries is not significant.

Note that the presentation and wire formats differ in the following ways. In the presentation format the
protocol identifier and weight are separated by an ASCII colon (":"); on the wire there is no colon, and the
protocol identifier string is instead preceded by a 1-octet length prefix. In the presentation format the
weight is written as one to three ASCII decimal digits; on the wire the weight is a single binary octet.
Multiple entries are separated by commas in the presentation format; on the wire, entries are concatenated
without any separator.

Examples:

ns.example.net. 300 IN SVCB 1 . oots="do53:100,dot:10"
ns.example.net. 300 IN SVCB 1 . oots="do53:100,dot:5,doq:5"
ns.example.net. 300 IN SVCB 1 . oots="do53:100,dot:25,doh:10,doq:10"

A well-formed "proto:weight" entry whose "proto" string is not in the set {"do53", "dot", "doh", "doq"} MUST
be ignored, and processing MUST continue with the remaining entries. This mirrors the wire-format handling of
unrecognized protocol identifiers (Section 1): because the entries are independent of one another, an
unrecognized entry does not invalidate the others. An entry that is not well-formed (for example, one missing
the colon separator, or one whose weight is absent or not a decimal integer in the range 0-100) is a parse
error for the enclosing SvcParam.

3. Interactions with Other SvcParamKeys

The "oots" key is independent of the "alpn", "port", "ipv4hint", and "ipv6hint" keys and MAY appear
alongside any of them without conflict.

The "oots" key MUST be ignored when it appears in an AliasMode SVCB record.

4. Security Considerations

The "oots" parameter is conveyed in DNS and is subject to the same integrity guarantees as the
enclosing SVCB record. Operators SHOULD sign SVCB records containing "oots" with DNSSEC to
prevent an adversary from removing or altering transport weight entries.

5. Contact.

Johan Stenstam
The Swedish Internet Foundation
johan.stenstam@internetstiftelsen.se

Philip Homburg
NLNet Labs
philip@nlnetlabs.nl

Change Controller: IETF
